README.md, before:

<!-- modrinth_exclude.start -->

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/modrinth/v/authback)](https://modrinth.com/mod/authback)
[![Build](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/litetex-oss/mcm-authback/check-build.yml?branch=dev)](https://github.com/litetex-oss/mcm-authback/actions/workflows/check-build.yml?query=branch%3Adev)

# AuthBack

<!-- modrinth_exclude.end -->

Allows you to play as normal even when Mojang's authentication servers are down.

#### How does it work?

1. The responses from Mojang's webservices/API are cached locally for some time.<br/>
If an outage occurs the previously cached responses are used.<br/>
For example this allows for your skin to be displayed properly.
2. Every client locally stores (or generates if not present) a keypair, which will be used as a fallback to authenticate with servers when Mojang's authentication servers are down (see [Public-key cryptography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public-key_cryptography)).<br/>
Please note:
    * The server also needs to have the mod installed
    * You must have already joined the server once (during the past 36 days)

The mod is optional for the client and server.<br/>
However if one side lacks the mod joining a server will be impossible when Mojang's centralized authentication servers/APIs are down.

## Usage

### Command

You can use the ``/authback`` command to e.g. manage your public keys or those of other players if you are an admin.

### Configuration

#### Client

You can edit the most important configuration in the game options UI via
* ``Options > Online... > AuthBack...``
* If ModMenu is installed: ``Mods > AuthBack > Click Icon/Settings``

#### General

<details><summary>The configuration is dynamically loaded from (sorted by highest priority)</summary>

* Environment variables 
    * prefixed with ``AUTHBACK_<variant>`` 
        * where ``variant`` is either ``SERVER`` OR ``CLIENT``
    * prefixed with ``AUTHBACK_``
    * all properties are in UPPERCASE and use `_` (instead of `.`) as delimiter
* System properties
    * prefixed with ``authback.<variant>`` 
        * where ``variant`` is either ``server`` OR ``client``
    * prefixed with ``authback.``
* A configuration file located in ``.config/authback-<variant>.json``
    * where ``variant`` is either ``server`` OR ``client``

</details>

<details><summary>Full list of configuration options</summary>

_Please note that the preconfigured values usually work out of the box.<br/>_
_You should know exactly what you're doing when doing modifications._

##### Common (Client and Server)

| Property | Type | Default | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `global-public-keys-cache.default-reuse-minutes` | `int` | `120` (2h) | The response for the global public keys of the central Mojang API barely ever changes. As of writing this documentation it has stayed the same the past 2+ years. This option instructs the mod to re-use the last saved response for the specified amount of minutes instead of contacting the API again. Using the cached response is a lot faster and saves network traffic during frequent game restarts. |
| `game-profiles.delete-after-days` | `int` | `36` | 36 days was choosen as the default because when a player changes their username the name will be unavailable for 37 days |
| `game-profiles.max-cache-size` | `int` | `250` | Maximum amount of game profiles to keep in the cache. If the size exceeds the maximum the oldest entries will be removed until the list is at 90% of the configured maximum. |
| `skip-extract-profile-action-types` | `bool` | `false` | Debug-Option |

##### Server

| Property | Type | Default | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `keys.max-keys-per-player` | `int` | `3` | Maximum amount of public keys to store per player |
| `keys.delete-after-unused-days` | `int` | `36` | If a user does not login with a public key for this amount of time the key will be deleted. 36 days was choosen as the default because when a player changes their username the name will be unavailable for 37 days |
| `fallback-auth.allow-always` | `bool` | `true` | Always allows the use of fallback authentication. Set to `false` if you only want to allow fallback authentication when the server can't communicate with the central Mojang API during a player login |
| `fallback-auth.rate-limit.requests-per-ip-per-minute` | `int` | `20` | The default allows for requests every 3s. If the value is set to 0 or less the rate limiter will be disabled |
| `fallback-auth.rate-limit.bucket-size` | `int` | `1000` | Amount of IP addresses to store (in memory) |
| `fallback-auth.rate-limit.ignore-private-addresses` | `bool` | `true` | Should [private IP addresses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Private_network) be rate limited? |
| `fallback-auth.rate-limit.ipv6-network-prefix-bytes` | `int` | `8` | Network prefix bytes (not bits!) for IPv6. The default `8` resolves to `/64`. |
| `skip-old-user-conversion` | `bool` | `true` | Skips the migration of user files used by servers before `1.7.6` (released 2014-04). It's extremely unlikely that this is required by a server and requires contacting the central Mojang API therefore the migration is skipped by default |

##### Client

All client specific options can be changed / are described in the game options UI (see above).

</details>

## FAQ

### The authentification servers are down, my friend got the mod but they can't join my server

This is because they never joined with the mod before.
You can fix this in the following way if you are an Admin:
1. Tell your friend to launch the game with the mod
2. and to send their public key to you
    * The public key can be found/copied in the client's mod options UI under `Key management`
3. Associate the public key on the server with them by running `/authback public_key add name <yourFriendsPlayerName> <yourFriendsPublicKey>`

### Where does the mod store it's data?

In the game directory (e.g. `%APDDATA%\.minecraft`) inside the ``.authback`` directory.

<!-- modrinth_exclude.start -->

## Installation
[Installation guide for the latest release](https://github.com/litetex-oss/mcm-authback/releases/latest#Installation)

### Usage in other mods

Add the following to ``build.gradle``:
```groovy
dependencies {
    modImplementation 'net.litetex.mcm:authback:<version>'
    // Further documentation: https://wiki.fabricmc.net/documentation:fabric_loom
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> The contents are hosted on [Maven Central](https://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2/net/litetex/mcm/). You shouldn't have to change anything as this is the default maven repo.<br/>
> If this somehow shouldn't work you can also try [Modrinth Maven](https://support.modrinth.com/en/articles/8801191-modrinth-maven).

## Contributing
See the [contributing guide](./CONTRIBUTING.md) for detailed instructions on how to get started with our project.

<!-- modrinth_exclude.end -->

Commit message:

Make it possible to join to a server during an outage when the mod was previously not installed

README.md, after:

<!-- modrinth_exclude.start -->

[![Version](https://img.shields.io/modrinth/v/authback)](https://modrinth.com/mod/authback)
[![Build](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/litetex-oss/mcm-authback/check-build.yml?branch=dev)](https://github.com/litetex-oss/mcm-authback/actions/workflows/check-build.yml?query=branch%3Adev)

# AuthBack

<!-- modrinth_exclude.end -->

Allows you to play as normal even when Mojang's authentication servers are down.

#### How does it work?

1. The responses from Mojang's webservices/API are cached locally for some time.<br/>
If an outage occurs the previously cached responses are used.<br/>
For example this allows for your skin to be displayed properly.
2. Every client locally stores (or generates if not present) a keypair, which will be used as a fallback to authenticate with servers when Mojang's authentication servers are down (see [Public-key cryptography](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public-key_cryptography)).<br/>
Please note:
    * The server also needs to have the mod installed
    * You must have already joined the server once (during the past 36 days)

The mod is optional for the client and server.<br/>
However if one side lacks the mod joining a server will be impossible when Mojang's centralized authentication servers/APIs are down.

## Usage

### Command

You can use the ``/authback`` command to e.g. manage your public keys or those of other players if you are an admin.

### Configuration

#### Client

You can edit the most important configuration in the game options UI via
* ``Options > Online... > AuthBack...``
* If ModMenu is installed: ``Mods > AuthBack > Click Icon/Settings``

#### General

<details><summary>The configuration is dynamically loaded from (sorted by highest priority)</summary>

* Environment variables 
    * prefixed with ``AUTHBACK_<variant>`` 
        * where ``variant`` is either ``SERVER`` OR ``CLIENT``
    * prefixed with ``AUTHBACK_``
    * all properties are in UPPERCASE and use `_` (instead of `.`) as delimiter
* System properties
    * prefixed with ``authback.<variant>`` 
        * where ``variant`` is either ``server`` OR ``client``
    * prefixed with ``authback.``
* A configuration file located in ``.config/authback-<variant>.json``
    * where ``variant`` is either ``server`` OR ``client``

</details>

<details><summary>Full list of configuration options</summary>

_Please note that the preconfigured values usually work out of the box.<br/>_
_You should know exactly what you're doing when doing modifications._

##### Common (Client and Server)

| Property | Type | Default | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `global-public-keys-cache.default-reuse-minutes` | `int` | `120` (2h) | The response for the global public keys of the central Mojang API barely ever changes. As of writing this documentation it has stayed the same the past 2+ years. This option instructs the mod to re-use the last saved response for the specified amount of minutes instead of contacting the API again. Using the cached response is a lot faster and saves network traffic during frequent game restarts. |
| `game-profiles.delete-after-days` | `int` | `36` | 36 days was choosen as the default because when a player changes their username the name will be unavailable for 37 days |
| `game-profiles.max-cache-size` | `int` | `250` | Maximum amount of game profiles to keep in the cache. If the size exceeds the maximum the oldest entries will be removed until the list is at 90% of the configured maximum. |
| `skip-extract-profile-action-types` | `bool` | `false` | Debug-Option |

##### Server

| Property | Type | Default | Notes |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| `keys.max-keys-per-player` | `int` | `3` | Maximum amount of public keys to store per player |
| `keys.delete-after-unused-days` | `int` | `36` | If a user does not login with a public key for this amount of time the key will be deleted. 36 days was choosen as the default because when a player changes their username the name will be unavailable for 37 days |
| `fallback-auth.allow-always` | `bool` | `true` | Always allows the use of fallback authentication. Set to `false` if you only want to allow fallback authentication when the server can't communicate with the central Mojang API during a player login |
| `fallback-auth.rate-limit.requests-per-ip-per-minute` | `int` | `20` | The default allows for requests every 3s. If the value is set to 0 or less the rate limiter will be disabled |
| `fallback-auth.rate-limit.bucket-size` | `int` | `1000` | Amount of IP addresses to store (in memory) |
| `fallback-auth.rate-limit.ignore-private-addresses` | `bool` | `true` | Should [private IP addresses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Private_network) be rate limited? |
| `fallback-auth.rate-limit.ipv6-network-prefix-bytes` | `int` | `8` | Network prefix bytes (not bits!) for IPv6. The default `8` resolves to `/64`. |
| `skip-old-user-conversion` | `bool` | `true` | Skips the migration of user files used by servers before `1.7.6` (released 2014-04). It's extremely unlikely that this is required by a server and requires contacting the central Mojang API therefore the migration is skipped by default |

##### Client

All client specific options can be changed / are described in the game options UI (see above).

</details>

## FAQ

### Where can I find my public key?

The public key can be found/copied in the client's mod options UI under `Key management`

The mod options can be found in
* ``Options > Online... > AuthBack...``
* or if ModMenu is installed: ``Mods > AuthBack > Click Icon/Settings``

### The authentification servers are down, I installed the mod on my server but I can't join

This is because the server doesn't know your public key.

You can fix this in the following way:
0. Make sure that you logged in less than a month ago 
    * that is because the entries in `usercache.json` - which will be used in such a case - will expire after a month
1. Make sure that you can run commands via the server console/RCON
2. Add the mod to your local client/game and launch it
3. Copy the public key (see above for details)
4. Associate the public key with your account: 
    * `/authback public_key add name <yourName> <yourPublicKey>`
    * or `/authback public_key add id <yourUUID> <yourPublicKey>`

You should now be able to log in as usual.<br/>
Note however that profile related content like skins will not not be displayed.

It's also recommended to restart the server once the outage is over to properly load existing profiles.

### The authentification servers are down, my friend got the mod but they can't join my server

This is because they never joined with the mod before.

You can fix this in the following way if you are an Admin:
1. Tell your friend to launch the game with the mod
2. and to send their public key to you
3. Associate the public key on the server with them by running `/authback public_key add name <yourFriendsPlayerName> <yourFriendsPublicKey>`

### Where does the mod store it's data?

In the game directory (e.g. `%APDDATA%\.minecraft`) inside the ``.authback`` directory.

<!-- modrinth_exclude.start -->

## Installation
[Installation guide for the latest release](https://github.com/litetex-oss/mcm-authback/releases/latest#Installation)

### Usage in other mods

Add the following to ``build.gradle``:
```groovy
dependencies {
    modImplementation 'net.litetex.mcm:authback:<version>'
    // Further documentation: https://wiki.fabricmc.net/documentation:fabric_loom
}
```

> [!NOTE]
> The contents are hosted on [Maven Central](https://repo.maven.apache.org/maven2/net/litetex/mcm/). You shouldn't have to change anything as this is the default maven repo.<br/>
> If this somehow shouldn't work you can also try [Modrinth Maven](https://support.modrinth.com/en/articles/8801191-modrinth-maven).

## Contributing
See the [contributing guide](./CONTRIBUTING.md) for detailed instructions on how to get started with our project.

<!-- modrinth_exclude.end -->
